---
layout: post
shortnews: false
title: Hints on how to write an SOSP paper
---

After reviewing between 50-100 papers per year for the last few years,
I've noticed some common problems in the papers that I review.  While
spotting these issues makes it faster for me to review papers, I
thought I would summarize them here.  Note that these are generally
aimed at systems papers but likely apply to other areas as well.

Generally speaking, these are the bare minimum requirements for a
systems paper and I frequently see papers rejected for missing one or
more of these points.  I break them down into roughly three sections.
A useful exercise is to summarize each of these parts of your paper
(i.e., the why, the how and the results), which can then be turned
into the conclusion.

### Intro, Background and Motivation
* The goal of a systems paper is generally to state a thesis and
  demonstrate that thesis through a software (or hardware) prototype
  and series of experiments.  For example, "this paper proposes that X
  is better for applications Y running in environment Z".  While there
  might be a bigger picture thesis or point, when it comes down to
  brass tacks, this is the core of a good paper.
  
* First, clearly understand and state your target environment (Z) and
  application (Y).  Many people miss this point and it makes the rest
  of the paper extremely difficult to understand!!
  
* Clearly motivate Y and Z.  Why is application Y important?  Why
  should we assume that Y commonly runs in Z?
  
* Clearly state why X is novel.  In very few cases is it only X that
  is new (unless you have some new super smart algorithm).  Instead,
  many systems papers are about a new application Y (the hot one now
  being ML) or Z (being some new hardware or deployment).  This is
  your chance to teach the community about an exciting new Y or Z.
  
* *Bonus:* What is the lesson to be learned from X? This is an extra
  level that many papers miss.  Is there a broader lesson to be
  learned from X that could be applied to other Y and Z?
  
* Clearly state why previous systems do not meet the needs of Y for Z.
  This is often most easily done by making a table of these previous
  systems and show that X better meets the needs of Y for Z based on
  some system aspect.  I often have students make this table even if
  it does not wind up in the paper to make sure that we all understand
  the related work clearly.

### The System
* Now you can get down to talking about X.  Clearly state Y and Z
  again and use a figure to show where X fits.  Do not assume that
  this is obvious!
  
* It might be relevant to discuss how X interacts with Y and Z,
  especially if it is different.

* If X introduces a lot of new terminology, a table that summarizes
  and defines the new terms is important.  It is easy to miss these
  definitions in the text.

* If X has a new API or new operations for Y or has new requirements
  for Z, summarizing these in a table again helps with readability.

* Every design choice made in X should be discussed with alternatives.
  Almost all design choices come with trade-offs. Do not only talk
  about the benefits of X but why the particular trade-off made by X
  is right for Y on Z.
  
* Some problems might be out of scope. Clearly state what X does not
  handle and *justify why*. Do not assume that reviewers can guess.
  
### The Results
* Explain how you constructed a prototype system to test your
  hypothesis that X is better for Y on Z.  This prototype might
  exactly match your design or there might be reasons why it cannot.
  It likely does not implement all of X thoroughly but the parts of X
  that are needed to test your hypothesis, clearly state the parts
  that are implemented.

* Clearly state the set up for every experiment. So many papers miss
  this.  How many times did you run the experiment? For how long?
  State every data object size!

* Every experiment should have a point; that is, each subsection and
  graph should have a concrete conclusion that contributes to
  demonstrating your hypothesis.  
  
* Clearly state each conclusion 3 times: at the beginning of the
  section as a hypothesis (e.g., this experiment will show), at the
  end of the section (e.g., this experiment showed), in the caption
  next to the graph (e.g., this graph shows).  Bonus points for
  explaining how to parse the graph in the caption so there is no need
  to dig through a bunch of text, then page back to the graph.
  
* There are generally 2 types of experiments.  The first are somewhat
  obvious; they compare X to a previous system for Y and Z.  This
  could use a number of metrics (e.g., performance, programmability,
  security, etc.).  There should not be surprises here! Many papers
  fall down here when the experiments just do not match with
  hypothesis. 
  
* The second breaks down the performance (or other metric) impact for
  each design decision and potential alternative design.  Many papers
  fail to include these but they are really important for
  understanding which parts of the system are fundamentally important
  to your hypothesis.

### Bonus part 4: Conclusion

* The conclusion should be a useful exercise in summarizing your paper
  in 3 sentences.  What is your hypothesis? What is your solution for
  testing this hypothesis? What is the result of this experiment? Now,
  you are ready to go back and write the abstract as well! In general,
  the abstract is harder to write because you cannot use terms or
  concepts that you introduced in paper, so someone with no background
  can read it. However, the conclusion does not have this limitation,
  so should be easy to write.
