---
layout: post
shortnews: false
title: The Moral Implications of Being a Moderately Successful Computer Scientist
---

I recently reached a few high points in my career that coincided, not
coincidentally, with some of the worst harassment of my life. It made
me reflect on how my career has been defined as much in terms of
misogyny as technical excellence (I've garnered quite a CV in both),
and how I have struggled to explain to others my experience.  This
blog post builds on previous work, like Katheryn McKinley's seminal
post[[1]](https://www.sigarch.org/what-happens-to-us-does-not-happen-to-most-of-you/)
and on Kate Manne's books [Down
Girl](http://www.katemanne.net/down-girl.html)[2] and
[Entitled](http://www.katemanne.net/entitled.html), which frame
misogyny through the lens of moral philosophy.

Kate defines misogyny as the enforcement branch of the patriarchy.
While sexism is a set of beliefs, misogyny is a set of actions and as
such, much more damaging to women.  Worse, misogyny enforces a
patriarchical worldview that *the majority of the world holds as the
morally correct one*.  Thus, when women break this norm (i.e., by
demanding authority, recognition, space and not providing goods that
men feel entitled to like domestic, emotional and mental labor), they
are *in the wrong*. The men become the victims, and the women enduring
the misogyny are the bad actors.  This viewpoint leads to
justification of a number of vile behaviors perpetuated by men that
claim to support and love women.  Finally, it is difficult to discuss
even the issues because both sides are not using the same framework of
what is acceptable "moral" behavior and what is not. As [my blog post
on
consistency](https://irenezhang.net/blog/2016/01/11/consistency.html)
pointed out, progress cannot be made on a topic when there is
disagreement on the underlying system model.

In this blog post, I will attempt to describe the system within which
I exist as a moderately successful computer scientist and woman. I
will highlight the moral fallacies that lead to women (1) leaving
tech, (2) generally being anxious in our society and (3) subject to
horrific harassment and misogyny.

### Moral Fallacy #1: Woman != Programmer

Before women even write a single line of code, they are already at a
disadvantage: when I was 6 years old, no one would look at my pigtails
and white Mary Janes and predict that I would grow up to be one of the
top operating systems researchers in the world.  However, this exact
prediction was so comically common for white men at MIT that my
husband and I joked that we should sell a line of neonatal audio books
on Paxos.

Of course, this prediction continues even while I *am* one of the top
operating systems researchers in the world.  If only I got a penny for
every time someone said: you don't *look* like a computer scientist, I
could be Mackenzie Scott without having to marry an asshole.  This
comment is usually posed as a compliment (that I don't look like
myself??), which I should graciously receive.

This mental dissonance is jarring and feels constantly like someone
slapping me *at work* and saying: Wake up, all this was a dream, you
didn't actually publish any SOSP papers this year! When so many people
constantly question your ability to do *your own job* based on
something as nonsensical as how you look, you really start to question
your own sanity.  When you are expected to thank people for the
privilege, you know you've entered the Twilight Zone.

So we begin with this absolutely bonkers setting for women working in
tech, but things only go downhill from there. If we penalize a man for
harassing women in computer science, we are "ruining his life", but if
a woman leaves because of harassment, she just "couldn't cut it."
This view assumes a moral framework where men are *entitled* to a
career as a computer scientist or professor, while women are
generously being allowed the same thing, which can be taken away at
any time.

## Moral Fallacy #2: Woman != Experts

As Kate says in Entitled, and we have all experienced, some men love
to be experts.  Men were born to pontificate, and women to listen. Not
surprisingly, I have run into an excess of this kind of man.  If you
want an entertaining description of this experience, read Men Explain
Things to Me.

Unfortunately, the dark underbelly of this phenonema is what happens
when a woman is the expert and the man is not, which is one that I
find myself in frequently.  This situation is when misogyny steps in
to enforce what the men perceive to be the societal (and moral) norms.
Not only do I have the gall to not look like a computer scientist, I
have the gall to actually be better at it than them.  This is
obviously completely unacceptable and my fault.

Now imagine what happens to the average woman professor who must stand
up every day and perform this act in the insane asylum.  If any of
them manage to last long enough to inspire any other women to join the
field, they (the women professors and students) are rapidly disabused
of this idea by the men in the classes that they teach.  The men
manage to do this, *despite the fact that these professors quite
literally have control over these men's careers*. The level of
misogyny and entitlement to achieve this act of harassing the person
attempting to teach you the things that you need to succeed is
mind-boggling.

## Moral Fallacy #3: Woman != Bad Feelings

Now that I have managed to make men feel embarrassed and insecure,
they blame these feelings on me. No one else has made them feel this
way before, and because men are famously good at emotional
self-regulation, *I* must be the problem.  Indeed, one of the things
that women are responsible for in our patriarchical society is
[managing men's emotions](https://medium.com/fearless-she-wrote/i-am-not-responsible-for-the-anger-of-men-eabf35161886).

While men *claim* to be unemotionally seeking scientific truth in
research, I have never seen a woman so personally-invested and
*emotional* about a research idea. Perhaps because women are not
allowed to use "top computer scientist" as their entire identity since
birth, we are better able to separate our research ideas from
ourselves and coldly discuss their pros and cons.  Or perhaps a
lifetime of being told that it is our job to regulate our own emotions
as well as those of the men around us has trained us to do pure
science without messy emotions. But of course women are hysterical,
and men are just passionate.

Since men do not know how to process these emotions, they lash out at
the women that caused them. The women are the ones committing the
wrong in their moral framework, so therefore they deserve to be
punished. This punishment can range from refusing to speak to the
woman -- which is a really mature reaction -- to actively harassing her.

## Moral Fallacy #4: Women != 

Many of the men that I interact with have been raised by wonderful
mothers that taught them to be supportive husbands, and some of them
even have daughters that taught them that my plight is real.  However,
as the Entitled book notes: many men have been and feel that they have
a right to be adored by the women in their lives.  It sounds
ridiculous but I am not their mother or daughter and I do not owe them
anything. However, since so many men ONLY interact with women in this
way, it may not be surprising that they mistake me for one of these
roles.  In our society, men are generally not friends with women
(unless they have been friendzoned and worthy of pity), so the only
models that men have for how to interact with women come from
experiences with their mothers, wives and daughters.

Of course, the most insidous of these feelings is sexual harassment,
when men expect women in a work setting to be open to romantic
overtures of various forms: crushes, asking out on dates, stalking.
This situation has always completely perplexed me because I do not
think that my workplace is a dating website.  But worse than this,
because the only experiences that many men have for interacting with
women is with family, they expect *unconditional love* (or admiration
or something similar).  For the women, this situation is worse than
insane, it would be like a random person on the street saying that
they are part of your family and going home with you.  But when you do
not give them the love or respect that they think they inately
deserve, the men will feel rejected and lash out.  It may even trigger
a feeling of rejection that they have had with family members, but I'm
not a Freudian therapist, so I shouldn't have to unpack that.

## Moral Fallacy #5: Women != Power

It is not for nothing that computer science as a field shapes our
world today. All of our titans of industry are computer scientists and
none of them are women. In fact, the women that contributed to their
success, like Melinda Gates, must be dismissed in service to
constructing a myth and religion around these men.
As long as computer science retains prestige, men will feel entitled
to it and women not. There has been mountains written about this
phenonema (and how women are only allowed to succeed in perceived
lower prestige parts of the field). 

One of the issues with not being allowed to seek power is that there
are very few ways to protect yourself. While working on harassment
issues as part of my code of conduct project, the most common question
was whether we were using our power to punish men unfairly. Note that
these were men who are actively harassing women and have had multiple
incidents reported. And yet, people are still saying that they are
entitled to be in that space because it makes *them* uncomfortable
when women are actively trying to take away men's power.  

Of course, the other side of the coin here is that as I get more
senior, the harassment that I have experienced has steadily been
growing more frequent and worse. Now, because I am a relatively
well-connected and successful part of our research community, I am
able to deal with the harassment in various ways, but I find that it
increasingly takes up my time and energy.  Even worse, I am now pulled
into other situations where harassment is happening because I am
expected, again as a senior member of the community, to help deal with
these situations. And of course, the situations are worse and worse as
I get more senior because the situation truly has to elevate to a
horrific level to need to involve me.

## Conclusion

Being a woman in tech is insane. We are not even working in the same
moral system model as most of the people that we interact with daily
and we can't talk about it because when we do, we are the ones
portrayed as crazy or hysterical.  Situations where we assume that
people will behave in rational ways (e.g., when codes of conduct are
not needed because we "trust" everyone), the default is simply to
reinforce the patriarchy. Men, do better. If you are in a position of
power and want to be an ally, educate yourself by reading Entitled[3]
and doing [training on inclusive
governance](https://github.com/microsoft/OSPO/tree/main/learning_resources/2022-code-of-conduct-workshop)[4]. Because
once they happen it will be too late, and if you think you are a nice
guy, there are plenty of other guys out there that are not so nice.

## References

1. [What Happens To Us Does Not Happen To Most of
   You](https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=kathryn+mckinley+what+happens+to+you&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8).
   Kathryn S. McKinley. February 2018.
2. [Down Girl: The Logic of
   Misogyn](http://www.katemanne.net/down-girl.html). Kate Manne. 2018.
3. [Entitled: How Male Privilege Hurts
   Women](http://www.katemanne.net/entitled.html). Kate Manne. August
   2020.
4. [Inclusive Governance: Codes of Conduct
   Workshop](https://github.com/microsoft/OSPO/tree/main/learning_resources/2022-code-of-conduct-workshop). Emma
   Irwin. 2022.
