---
layout: post
shortnews: false
title: My Job as a Microsoft Researcher
---

Recently, I spent some time reflecting on my 6 years at Microsoft
Research. I have thank my management chain -- Shan Lu, Ed Nightingale,
Desney Tan -- for triggering this analysis of how I view my job.  My
previous management chain certainly spoke about their values and MSR
culture, but I had not been at MSR for long enough to think about or
understand what they were saying.  Certainly, my experience and goals
do not encompass all researchers at MSR, that is one of the really
great things about MSR, most of us get to write our own job
description.  This musing is also not meant to speak for others, even
the folks named in it; it is simply my own opinion, values and goals.

Many folks have asked me in the past: *what is being an MSR researcher
like?* It's an interesting question because, in some ways, it is much
more nebulous than academia, but on the other hand, I report to a
manager, who reports to another manager and so on, and is solely
responsible for evaluating my performance.  However, I can choose what
I spend my time on, whether it is writing papers, writing code,
interacting with faculty, grad students or software engineers.  My job
is not as fixed in terms of how I spend my day-to-day time, and success
can be evaluated in a number of ways, compared to academia, where I
feel the goal posts are much clearer.

As a result, in addition to defining my own research agenda, some days
I feel that I also have to figure out what the heck I'm suppose to be
doing in the first place.  As I told folks that have asked, when I
showed up at MSR, they gave me an empty office and just said: do your
thing!  It took me *months* to figure out exactly what my "thing" was.
This statement is not a poor reflection of my org chart, I am so
grateful to my manager at the time, Ricardo Bianchini, the rest of my
management chain, (Donald Kossmann, Johannes Gehrke) and the fantastic
members of the systems group and other groups who provided tons of
advice, guidance and inspiration.  But I think most researchers find
their own journey when they start at MSR, and this does take some time.
The great thing is that no one will really expect you to be productive
in a research sense for the first year or two out of your PhD, so this
time is really fun -- but also scary -- because there are so many
possibilities, much like when first starting your PhD.

Now that I have done this job for a while, I think I have a reasonably
good view of what *I* strive for.  My job seems to encompass three
roles: innovator, educator and community contributor.  I'll talk about
each in more detail, but these are not so different from academic
responsibilities in research, teaching and service (Funding is a whole
other issue that could occupy its own post.)

* Innovator 

This role is my most important and hardest. My role at MSR is first
and foremost to produce ideas, which I see as reading trends,
predicting the future and finding gaps where I (my research expertise)
can provide value.  This role is totally the same as faculty, but I do
it from within a hyperscalar that runs tons of services and
datacenters.  Of course, this environment comes with pros and cons: I
have access to software engineers and hardware designers that are in
the trenches trying to make things work every day, but my research
agenda is constrained by things that help make their lives easier and
that the company cares about.  The cons are not so onerous because, as
a systems researcher, I want to build systems that people will use,
and a large (possibly largest??) company like Microsoft inevitably
cares about almost everything that matters (take with grain of salt).
In fact, having some constraints makes deciding what research to do
somewhat easer because I don't have to guess at whether I'm doing
useful research or not; someone will tell me in a pretty direct way.

I find interacting with software engineers to be really energizing, so
when I can get their time, I really prefer to find out what their pain
points are, what they worry about, what keeps them up (or wakes them
up) at night.  That said, I simply collect these perspectives to
construct a picture with future trends that I see and try to predict
where problems will pop up in the future.  There are pretty much three
types of problems that I have found; 1) problems that exist now that
we (computer scientists) know how to solve, 2) problems that exist now
that we don't know how to solve, and 3) problems that don't exist now
but will in the future that we don't know how to solve (I suppose
there are also future problems that we know how to solve but those
don't seem too interesting as they are neither novel nor pressing). 

I aim to work on the third category.  In the first category, the
constraint is often time: while we know how to solve many problems,
engineers don't always have time to solve them, so sometimes I can
provide value there. Category 2 is what I imagine that the research
groups embedded in various product groups aim to solve (while not
speaking for them, certainly some of them are working on Category 3
problems).  Working on this third category means that I have the most
impact, but it also means that it can take a loooong time for my
research to become useful.  In the meantime, I entertain myself
writing papers, building systems and trying to be useful to my product
collaborators.

* Educator

This role is the most fun. In contrast to faculty that teach tens or
hundreds (or thousands?!?) of students each year, my role as a
researcher is to interact with the thousands of software engineers at
Microsoft (and beyond).  They spend their days keeping everything up
and running, while I interrupt them to talk about the BIG SCARY
PROBLEM that will show up SOON and the SHINY NEW SYSTEM that will
solve their problem that they DO NOT HAVE BUT SHOULD DEFINITELY CARE
ABOUT.  I recently had a manager tell me to stop distracting the
software engineers with shiny new toys. :)

I find these interactions incredibly rewarding. By and large, my
experiences with software engineers at Microsoft have been positive,
especially as someone that has done their job out of college (or just
someone with sympathy and empathy). Sleep-deprived software engineers
that are being woken up on call because their service suddenly
increased 10x in size due to the pandemic really do not want a random
researcher telling them that they are doing everything wrong,
everything is broken, and they must immediately fix it.  But that is
what I do, and incredibly, these folks that have been working on these
services for 10+ years actually listen to me.

My current work on kernel-bypass operating systems is at least half
hand-hold engineers as we go into a big scary world of nanosecond
latencies and weird hardware accelerators with four letter acronyms.
They have a lot of experience, but much of what they are doing now is
not going to work going forward to terabit NICs, so we spend a lot of
time explaining new technologies and helping software engineers figure
out how to get their services to leverage those technologies.  I
usually call this part of my role consulting, which indicates that I
am lending expertise but absolutely not taking responsibility for
anything that I break.

* Contributor

The last part of my job is giving back to the research community that
I grew up in. I spent much of the first few years post-PhD reviewing
papers on PCs; by now, I have chaired quite a few PCs.  Microsoft
supports our communities by paying me to do this because it benefits
from the research output, and I do it because research is
fundamentally a collaborative effort and that requires a healthy
community of researchers exchanging ideas around the world. 

I've also worked on generally improving our community. I started the
2019 petition to move both SOSP and OSDI to an annual cadence (with
the strong support of my management chain). I started and got MSR to
fund a survey and project to improve codes of conduct in our
communities. Likewise, my management chain supported me in this by
providing most of the funding, but Microsoft also crucially provide my
collaborators -- Demetris Cheatham and Emma Irwin -- that had previous
experience with harassment in the open-source community and continue
to work on making OSS communities safer as their full-time jobs.

I love to advise PhD students. I can often offer another point of view
from their advisors, but much like the fun aunt, I don't have to make
them do generals or write a thesis. I have also benefited immensely
from the senior faculty that I've been able to co-advise with: Scott
Shenker, Boon Thau, Phil Levis, Tom Anderson, Ronaldo Alves
Ferreira. It's always inspiring to see how they think about problems,
and I have no constraints on who I can work with so I try to
collaborate with as many faculty as possible.  It is also just fun to
work with friends, like Adam Belay, Simon Peter, Jialin Li. I can
always embarrass them by telling their grad students stories from grad
school.  It was great to work with all of the folks on the Treehouse
project where I was able to connect with faculty and students across 4
universities.

Finally, I am incredibly proud of the high-quality open-source
operating system that is now deployed at Microsoft.  Microsoft
supporting open-source is still a recent novelty to me, but I would
not be at MSR if I could not open-source my research.  I hope
Demikernel will be a research platform for universities that do not
have to resources to develop and maintain a research OS.  Obviously,
universities can produce high-quality operating systems, as Mothy
Roscoe had demonstrated more than once, but I think it would be hard
to build and maintain a research prototype like Demikernel without the
resources and support of MSR.  I also enjoy working with and mentoring
the large number of software engineers that have worked on Demikernel:
Sujay Jayakar, Pedro Henrique Penna, Brian Zill, Anand Bonde.

* Conclusion 

Wow, this really turned into a thesis acknowledgements section. It is
nice to write about the wins and positive experiences of the last 6
years; there were plenty of negative experiences, which I will save
for another time (or drinks with my friends that are always there for
me, looking at you, Natacha Crooks). But I hope this post helps grad
students trying to make a decision, as my first advising batch are
graduating this year and next (and if you are hiring, you know how to
find me)!



