---
layout: post
shortnews: false
title: Lessons Learned from UW Systems Lab Harassment Incidents
---

Over the last 6 months, I have supported 7 women in the UW Systems Lab
through the reporting and investigation of a series of sexual
harassment and bullying incidents.  The Allen School's investigation
recently completed, letting me and the women finally speak out and
reflect on the experience.  I'd like to share some lessons learned to
help other women and departments navigate similar events.

As a tongue in cheek reference to
[this](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~pattrsn/talks/BadTalk.pdf), I
will be providing tips on how *not* to handle a sexual harassment
situation in your lab.

1. Tell women to trust a fundamentally sexist system

From the beginning, the women were told that they must go through the
university complaint process for the Allen School to take any action
against their harassers. This included advisors having a conversation
about appropriate workplace behavior with the men and more general
conversations about lab culture.  While this guidance is likely not
surprising to any university employee, it does seem like a practical
first step, which is why it has been banned.

Now that the university has finished the investigation,
unsurprisingly, they found no actionable issues! Despite a
traumatizing 6 month process, we are back exactly where we started.
Not only that, the process continued to victimize them by blaming them
for the issues and at one point, requiring them to discuss sexually
explicit incidents that never happened.  It also led to them being
unable to work as the investigator would randomly schedule meetings,
which would cause some or all of them to relive the incidents.  

The Allen School administration was particularly adamant that the
women must follow the proper procedures or "the bullies would win." As
we have all learned recently, the system protects bullies, and the
bullies are the ones that put the system in place, so either way the
women lose.  The question is only whether they lose immediately or
after 6 months of lost productivity and emotional turmoil.

If the goal was to preserve the women's careers, the invasive
investigative process is shockingly good a killing them. Instead, the
men have been going about their lives and going to work with no issues.

2. Make the reporting process unpleasant and difficult to navigate

Once the women decided to start the process, they were bounced between
the Allen School counselors, the Title IX office and HR.  No one
wanted to deal with the situation, so they all hoped that someone else
would.  The Title IX office was particularly useless, despite this
being their only job, because they gave the women false information
and then lied to them about it.  I understand that this is not their
fault and they are just a mouthpiece for the university lawyers, but
the outcome was the same.

At every step, the women were forced to report to untrained and
unsympathetic university employees: first the Allen School counselors,
then Title IX, then Safe Campus, then Student Services, then CRIO and
finally the HR investigator. These people had no professional
expertise in intake of traumatic reports and did not even try.  They
seemed to resent that the women were "making a fuss" in the first
place.

This strategy is very effective because if you make the reporting
experience unpleasant, than more people will not report and the
organization can pat itself on the back and say that there are no
issues (see: ACM CARES committees).

3. Gaslight the women into thinking what they experienced was not
sexual harassment

4. Tell the women that their mental health is not as important as
men's careers

At every step the process reeked of himpathy. While the women were
raising issues like whether they felt safe at work, the men were
worried about their careers.

1. The system is fundamentally flawed and biased against women

From the beginning, when the women reported the harassment incidents,
they were told that they must go through a formal complaint process
for the Allen School to take any action against the harassers.  This
included having advisors discuss what constituted professional
behavior with the men and discussions around lab culture.  After the
women wrote a letter documenting serious incidents, the faculty were
motivated to draft a code of conduct for the lab. However, because the
men complained about the contents of the code of conduct, the faculty
were informed that they could not take actions that would generally
improve the lab, like scheduling bystander training.  Those people
that work at universities will likely not be surprised by this outcome,
but I wanted to document this for folks that are not, because it was
certainly surprising to me.

Thus, the women were told that their only recourse was to go through
an official process involving the Title IX office, CRIO and HR.  Allen
School administration was particularly insistent that the process
would ensure "that the bullies would not win."  At this point, I
resigned my position in the Allen School because I knew the process
would not end well (based on much previous research) and that it would
likely be traumatizing for the women.  However, with no other
recourse, they decided to move forward.